Title: Decolonize Currency
Author: Shaila Agha and Will Ruddick
Date: Aug 27 2021
Slug: decolonize-currency
Summary: We recognize the struggle of people forced to use monopolistic
currencies

tags

: human rights, colonialism, economic sovereignity

![image](images/blog/decolonize-currency1.webp)

The abuse of monopolistic currency systems has caused generations of
economic trauma across the globe and fuels the destruction of our
planet.

Historically and today being forced to use currencies created by people
outside your community meant you are under a colonial power. e.g [El
Salvadorians and people in all Nations should not have to choose between
various Crypto and other foreign currencies like
USD](https://www.coindesk.com/markets/2021/07/14/the-headache-of-crypto-colonialism/)
Instead EMPOWER people to make their own economic systems and connect to
others. Communities can create their OWN credit backed by their
production and use it as medium of exchange - as has been done for
centuries prior to colonization.

The International Finance Corporation (IFC) estimates that 65 million
firms, or 40% of formal micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) in
developing countries, have an unmet financing need of $5.2 trillion
every year, which is equivalent to 1.4 times the current level of the
global MSME lending." [World
Bank](https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/smefinance/)

The current global credit creation system is not able to serve the needs
of the masses and foreign crypto would gladly try to fill this space as
in El Salvador - while local economic systems and technology need
support and regulation - and importantly **economic liberty needs to be
understood as a fundamental human right.**

There are 192 member states of the UN, all of whom have signed on in
agreement with the [Universal Declaration of Human
Rights](https://www.un.org/en/about-us/universal-declaration-of-human-rights/)
-written in 1948

# Article 22 - Social Security

_Everyone, as a member of society, has the right to social security and
is entitled to realization, through national effort and international
cooperation and in accordance with the organization and resources of
each State, of the economic, social and cultural rights indispensable
for his dignity and the free development of his personality._

Article 22 needs to be brought up to speed in a world that is rapidly
changing. Where communities, villages and cities can use technology to
create their own systems. Further, it should extend to include the right
for communities to develop their own forms of social security, good and
service valuation, governance and economic systems.

Dignity demands that people have the means to value themselves and their
goods and services. A community (especially without access to National
Currency or someone else's crypto/token) must be empowered to create
their own credit systems - just as they have done for countless
generations throughout history prior to colonization.Nation states are
encouraged to support regulation of these local economic systems and
impose
[taxation](https://www.grassrootseconomics.org/post/taxation-community-currencies/)
mechanisms - but they must enable people to freely develop their own
credit and means of exchange and not be forced into systems that are
predatory and that they hold no say or control over.

The mission of Grassroots Economics Foundation is to enable people,
groups and organizations to develop local economic systems, in order to
trade, share, value, and support collective action. We seek to align
grassroots economic systems with long term social and ecological health
and declare the following:

# Declaration of Economic Liberty and Interdependence

We recognize the struggle of people forced to use monopolistic
currencies and the necessity of people to organize for the establishment
of decentralized and interconnected economic systems.

We hereby show our support towards the development of regulations,
standards, policies and technologies that enable communities to create
their own and connect to other economic systems and safeguard people
from the dangers of monopolistic currencies for the betterment of
humankind and our harmonious coexistence on planet Earth.

We pledge to provide and support equitable, accessible and inclusive
financial systems for all: Money created by the people, for the people.
